---
title: Who Can Teach MSHA Part 46 Training?
url: https://www.osha.com/blog/who-can-teach-msha-part-46-training
date: '2026-03-19'
author: Jessica Barrera
feed_url: https://osha.com/rss.xml
---
Who Can Teach MSHA Part 46 Training? Jessica Barrera Thu, 03/19/2026 - 02:05 If you’re involved in a surface mining operation, then it’s crucial to understand the MSHA Part 46 trainer requirements. In this article, we’ll explain who can conduct MSHA training for Part 46, who counts as a competent person for MSHA, whether you can complete MSHA training online , and other must-know details for training compliance. Who Can Conduct MSHA Part 46 Training? The question of who can conduct MSHA training varies by MSHA part. Some MSHA parts, including Part 48, require mandatory training to be conducted by an instructor with formal MSHA approval. MSHA Part 46 trainer requirements are different. Part 46 allows mine operators or independent contractors to designate qualified individuals to conduct training. These designated trainers must meet the MSHA’s definition of a competent person , but there is no MSHA application process that needs to be followed. One of the benefits of this training model is that it allows mining operators or independent contractors to hire dedicated third-party MSHA training providers rather than writing their training program in-house. While MSHA Part 48 training typically needs to be in person, the rules for Part 46 compliance allow for MSHA training online. We’ll discuss the benefits of online MSHA miner training below. MSHA Part 46 Trainer Responsibilities and Compliance Once designated a competent person under MSHA Part 46, each trainer has the responsibility to certify that each miner has completed their topic, but only after they ensure that the miner fully understands each topic. Miners may not begin work until initial training, either New Miner Training or Newly Hired Experienced Miner Training , is complete and documented. Allowing untrained miners to work can result in citations, and not just for the operator; trainers may be held liable as the operator’s agents. MSHA Part 46 Training Program Requirements Mine operators must develop a written training plan for Part 46 compliance, including: The duration and method of training (ie, MSHA training online or in person) The topics to be covered The names and titles of competent persons for each topic Trainers must be identified in the documentation as competent persons in their subject matter, but employers are not required to document proof of competency. Additionally, MSHA requires health and safety training for miners to take place during normal working hours. When Is MSHA Part 46 Training and Retraining Required? Now that you know who can conduct MSHA training for Part 46, let’s talk about when training needs to take place. Miners need to complete MSHA Part 46 training: Before they begin work : For inexperienced miners, this means 24 hours of New Miner Training, while newly hired “experienced miners” need training that addresses the specific mine’s operations, hazards, and policies. Before they begin a new task : Miners who are assigned to tasks in which they have no previous work experience need training in the specific safety hazards before they begin. Annual refresher training : Once miners have completed their initial training, they need at least 8 hours of refresher training every year. Refresher training must review relevant health and safety subjects, but also include instruction on any changes at the mine site that could affect their health or safety. The MSHA also requires site-specific hazard awareness training for non-miners, like office or delivery personnel, on the mining hazards they may encounter while on-site. What Are MSHA’s Recordkeeping Requirements? Part 46 operators must keep records of required health and safety training for all personnel. MSHA Form 5000-23 is the standard documentation, but alternative forms of documentation are acceptable as long as they contain all the required information. The required components of a training record include the: Full name of the person trained Type of training (new miner, experienced miner, annual refresher, task-specific training, or site-specific hazard awareness) Duration of training Date of training Name of the competent person who provided the training Name of the mine or independent contractor and their MSHA ID number Location of training Signature of someone designated in the training plan to certify that training is complete These training records must be maintained for at least two years and made available for inspection at the mine site at the request of the MSHA, miners, or their representatives. If training records are kept elsewhere, they need to be “immediately producible.” Benefits of Online MSHA Part 46 Training Online courses make Part 46 compliance simpler for mine operators and contractors. The flexibility of MSHA training online makes it convenient to train all miners uniformly and cost-effectively, regardless of shiftwork. Employees can learn at their own pace, and employers can assign and track training completion digitally. Online Part 46 training also simplifies documentation. Certificates and wallet cards are available immediately after course completion. Start Your MSHA Part 46 Training Online With 25 years of experience in online occupational safety and health training, we’re a great choice for Part 46 employers who are looking for a way to streamline their training process. We offer MSHA Part 46 New Miner & Newly Hired Experienced Miner courses, MSHA Part 46 8-hour Surface Mining Refresher courses, and MSHA Part 46 2-hour Surface Mining Refresher courses in an online, self-paced format that meets the competent person standard. Training includes required topics like hazard awareness, emergency procedures, PPE, and more. Enroll to get started today! Sources : MSHA . Accessed January 2026. Feed Override If you’re involved in a surface mining operation, then it’s crucial to understand the MSHA Part 46 trainer requirements. In this article, we’ll explain who can conduct MSHA training for Part 46, who counts as a competent person for MSHA, whether you can complete MSHA training online , and other must-know details for training compliance.
