---
title: The Top Tips for Proper Fire Safety at Work
url: https://www.osha.com/blog/essential-fire-safety-tips
date: '2026-03-26'
author: Jessica Barrera
feed_url: https://osha.com/rss.xml
---
The Top Tips for Proper Fire Safety at Work Jessica Barrera Thu, 03/26/2026 - 02:05 Workplace fire hazards pose a risk to individual safety, business operations, and legal compliance, which is why fire safety at work is so important. Prevention, awareness, and fire and life safety training are key to reducing workplace fire hazards. In this article, we’ll cover the regulations and responsibilities that employers must know, along with fire safety tips and training guidance. The Importance of Fire Safety at Work When most people think about fire safety at work, they focus on the immediate aftermath of a potential fire; the damage to life, limb, and property. While avoiding these outcomes is obviously a good reason for prioritizing fire safety, the impact of proactive fire safety goes beyond prevention. Proactive fire safety is good for your business even if a major fire never occurs. Fire safety is an essential part of your business continuity plan, preventing long-term closures and protecting both your assets and your reputation. Proactive fire safety is also good for employee well-being. Employees who feel secure and know their business cares about their well-being are more productive. Finally, there are financial incentives. By engaging in smart fire safety at work, you maintain compliance with regulatory requirements from local codes to OSHA, thereby reducing your risk of legal penalties and lawsuits. Fire safety programs can also lead to lower insurance premiums. How Fire Affects Workers Every year, there are, at a minimum, 50,000 workplace fires. The National Fire Incident Reporting System records 16,500 office and store fires a year, causing $932 million in direct property damage, and the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) reports over 36,500 industrial and manufacturing fires a year, causing $1.5 billion in direct property damage. Industries most affected include: Manufacturing and Industrial Properties Restaurants and Commercial Kitchens Warehousing and Storage Oil & Gas Agriculture and Forestry Construction Common Fire Hazards in the Workplace The fire hazards in a particular workplace will depend on the industry and equipment involved, but there are some trends that are well-documented. Common fire hazards in the workplace include: Cooking Equipment causes 61% of all fires in restaurants and commercial kitchens, 65% of fires in healthcare facilities, 48% of hotel/motel fires, and 29% of office fires. Hot Work, like welding, cutting, or brazing , is the source of ignition in 34% of all workplace fires, particularly common in industries like oil & gas, industry & manufacturing, and construction. Electrical Faults, Malfunctions, or Failures cause 13-25% of all workplace fires, including 32% of office fires, 30% of industrial and manufacturing fires, 28% of retail fires. Faulty or damaged wiring, overloaded circuits, and damaged equipment are the most common culprits. Heat-Producing Equipment is the source of ignition in 10-16% of all workplace fires. Industrial and manufacturing facilities are at particular risk due to industrial heating equipment and shop tools sparking 28% of all fires, but space heaters and microwaves are responsible for 10% of office fires as well. Flammable Materials, while not a source of ignition, contribute to the severity of a fire by acting as fuel sources. Warehousing, storage, oil & gas, agriculture, and forestry all have heightened fire risks due to large quantities of combustible materials. Proper handling and housekeeping can mitigate the inherent risks of flammable materials. Practical Fire Safety Tips at Work To get you started, here are some practical tips for fire safety at work that you can start implementing today. Practice routine equipment maintenance. Faulty equipment can overheat, serving as the ignition point for a workplace fire. Routine equipment inspection and maintenance, as well as a problem reporting system, can help you catch equipment flaws before they cause a fire. Mark exits and evacuation routes clearly. It’s shocking how quickly a space can become unnavigable due to smoke. Lighted signs are necessary to enable employees to locate exits. Easy-to-read escape routes should also be posted throughout the building, providing alternative routes for employees and guidance for visitors. Make fire extinguishers accessible. Extinguishers should be placed in visible locations that are easy to reach, and more abundant in high-risk areas like kitchens. Provide fire extinguisher training to employees so they know how to use them. Enforce safe use of electrical equipment. Teach employees to avoid overloading circuits, retire equipment with exposed wires, and keep a clear zone around heat-producing equipment. Create a regular inspection cycle for damaged cords and outlets. Store flammable materials properly by labeling them and keeping them clear of heat sources. Ensure proper ventilation for the storage of flammable liquids and gases. Practice good housekeeping. A cluttered workspace is a fire safety hazard. Require employees to tidy up, especially near walkways and escape routes. Encourage prompt disposal of flammable materials. Hazard awareness and prevention training can help you instill smart fire safety tips like these into your workforce so that employees know to take actions that reduce daily fire risk. Fire Safety at Work Regulations and Legislation The primary sources of fire safety at work legislation are the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and local governments through building and fire codes. The NFPA also publishes codes and standards that are often adopted into law by regulating bodies. Many regulations apply universally across all industries. Generally, OSHA standards require employers to maintain: A written fire prevention plan A written emergency action plan Installation of fire detection and alarm systems Unobstructed exits that are well-marked, lit, and unlocked during work hours Portable fire extinguishers , inspected regularly Regular inspection of firefighting equipment and heat-producing devices Employee training in fire hazards and evacuation procedures That said, high-risk industries often have additional layers of standards that they must follow according to the workplace hazards they contain. These extra requirements range from an internal fire brigade to the proper storage, handling, and ventilation of compressed gases and flammable liquids. Fire safety at work regulations protect employees and property, but compliance with OSHA, NFPA, and local fire regulations is also critical for avoiding penalties and legal action. Who Is Accountable for All Fire Safety at Work? Employers hold primary accountability for all workplace fire safety, with certain “responsible persons” within the organization holding specific duties. Employees are primarily responsible for cooperating with employer policies. OSHA Standards OSHA’s fire safety at work regulations place the primary responsibility for fire safety on employers. In addition to the written plans and precautions mentioned above, employers are required to ensure compliance by: Conducting regular fire safety inspections Inspecting and maintaining fire detection, alarm, and mitigation systems and equipment Maintaining fire doors, unlocked from the inside during working hours Ensuring proper handling and storage of flammable materials Training employees regularly in fire prevention and evacuation procedures Employee Hierarchy Some employees have more responsibility for fire safety than others. Employers are allowed to delegate specific implementation and monitoring duties to managers and other designated “responsible persons.” This includes appointed and trained fire wardens who help manage evacuation procedures during an emergency or a drill. When delegating fire safety duties to responsible persons, there needs to be clear accountability and expectations. Employers should follow up to ensure that designated duties are being handled in compliance with the law. For employees who are not designated responsible persons, there is a legal duty to cooperate with employers on fire safety. This includes following safety protocols, using equipment correctly, reporting hazards immediately, and attending fire safety training sessions. Fire Safety at Work Compliance and Ongoing Guidance Fire safety compliance is never a one-and-done task. Compliance requires ongoing attention, including regular inspections, annual training, and documentation support for all compliance activity. It’s also important to review and update fire safety plans regularly, accommodating new equipment, processes, and layouts to keep them fresh and relevant. Additionally, fire safety at work regulations and best practices evolve with new technology as well as developments in the understanding of fire hazards and interventions. This means employers need to regularly seek out updated guidance on fire safety at work in order to provide the best protection. Authoritative sources include OSHA, the NFPA, fire departments, and other fire authorities. Training Employees for Smarter Fire Safety at Work Employee training is a crucial part of smart fire safety at work. Employees can only do their part if they have knowledge of fire hazards, prevention strategies, emergency response, and evacuation protocols. Online fire safety training can enhance compliance by making mandatory training consistent, accessible, always up to date, and flexible to individuals’ schedules and responsibilities. Take the Next Step With OSHA.com Fire Safety Training As a trusted source for structured fire safety education, OSHA.com offers online workplace fire protection training that can strengthen workplace safety culture. In fact, we have a full catalog of workplace safety courses , along with business solutions to streamline your safety training compliance. Explore our training catalog today! Feed Override Workplace fire hazards pose a risk to individual safety, business operations, and legal compliance, which is why fire safety at work is so important. Prevention, awareness, and fire and life safety training are key to reducing workplace fire hazards. In this article, we’ll cover the regulations and responsibilities that employers must know, along with fire safety tips and training guidance.
